In this video, I want to break down the
differences between an OpenClaw agent
and a sub agent and when you should use
one versus the other. We're going to use
Muddy OS as an example versus how we
have things configured. And then I also
prepared this documentation that we're
going to go through side by side to
hopefully help you better understand
what the differences of an agent versus
sub agent are. So, without squir, let's
build. All right. So, as you can see
here on the screen, I have my org chart.
I have me up top. I have Muddy. This is
my primary OpenClaw agent. I have Elon,
which is another OpenClaw agent with his
own workspace. And we'll get in more
into that in a little bit. Gary the
same. Warren the same. So, I have four
total agents up top. Then underlying I
have all of these sub agents. You may be
asking, what's the difference? Well, let
me show you. So an agent is a fully
scoped brain with its own workspace, its
own state directory and its own session
store. Whereas a sub aent is nothing
more than an isolated session. It's a
temporary session that performs a task,
gives its results and then ends its
session, right? So it doesn't have any
persistent memory. Now moving along,
think of it like this with an agent.
You're hiring a new employee. They get
their own desk, their own computer,
their own login credentials, their own
filing cabinet, nothing shared unless
you explicitly set it up. And for sub
agents, think of it like handing a
sticky note to your employee, go do this
thing, and come back. They use your
desk, finish the job, hand you the
result, and the sticky note goes into
the trash. Now, what do the workspaces
look like? Well, with an agent
workspace, you have all of your MD
files. You have your soul, your
identity, your user, your agents, your
tools, your memory, and your heartbeat.
Whereas with sub aent workspaces, they
don't have any of that. They get a
temporary session ID and then they read
the parents workspace files. This is
actually very critical to understand as
you set up your organization within
OpenClaw. Here are the major differences
here. As I mentioned already, it has its
own workspace. It has its own session
store where chat history lives in a
completely se separate directory than
your primary agent or then any other
agent. It has its own o profiles and it
reads directly from its own JSON for
that. So you can manage agent
credentials if you have different
credentials for different agents, right?
It has its own skills directory as well
and then it has its own channel
bindings. This is critical if you want
to create separate Telegram bots with
direct access to different agents within
your open clause setup. And then it
grows over time, right? These memory
files accumulate, identity evolves, the
agent remembers what it did yesterday,
last week, last month, etc. Right? The
the main benefits of setting up
OpenClaw. Now, sub agents, they're
spawned via a sessions spawn. These are
temporary. These are created on demand
by the parent agent. It gets a task,
does the work, reports back. It does not
own its own workspace, right? It does
not have its own workspace. So, it runs
inside of the parents agents workspace.
No separate soulm memory MD or identity
files whatsoever. It does get
autoarchchived after each session is
spawned. There's no session tools,
right? That's reliant on the parent
workspace. And then it's task scoped. So
it's designed for one-off jobs.
Research, write a draft, run a
calculation, generate a report, and then
it auto announces. When it's done, the
result is automatically announced back
to the parents chat channel. Now, you're
going to notice when you first set up
your open cloth setup, it will actually
spin up its own sub agents, right?
Because it tries to always keep its chat
open to you, but you're going to notice
it's a default feature built in to OC.
Okay, moving along. Right, the session
key format that you're going to notice
in chat and on the back end is agent,
right? This I'm using Gary as an
example, one of my agents and this is
his main chat. Whereas agent main sub
agent, right? So in this case, if Gary
were to spin up a separate session, it
would go agent, Gary, then sub agent.
Right now, real examples based off of my
organization. Gary has a persistent
role. He's my CMO. Anything content and
marketing and strategy related, all of
those sub agents and tasks fall
underneath Gary. The same for Elon,
right? He's a CTO. He's engineering and
infrastructure, front end, backend,
security audits, etc. And then he has
his own team of sub agents. And then
Warren, right, he's the CRO. He's
responsible for revenue and growth. I do
have a Clay Discord community bot with
his own workspace. We're not going to
dig into that too much on this one, uh,
because I wanted to highlight the key
org chart of the three primary agents I
use in addition to Muddy, my COO, my
executive assistant. Then for sub
agents, right, it's one-off tasks. So
write the episode 2 script. This gets
detected that it's a role by Gary and
then Gary spins up the sub agent. Same
for research competitor channels. You
get the idea. Spawn by Muddy
autoarchchived. Fix the CSS bug. It
detects it's a frontend or backend
related request. It then sends it off to
Elon. Elon then spawns whatever sub aent
session he needs to spawn. Right? So I'm
hoping you're getting a better
understanding as we're going down this
comparison. Well, so when to use each
one, right? Well, you use an agent when
you need persistent memory, identity,
and personality. It must remember things
between sessions. It maintains its own
files over time, and then it has its own
communication channel. It's a role, not
a task. That's a key differentiator
there. Now, use a sub agent when the job
has a clear start and end. It doesn't
need to remember anything tomorrow. You
want to stay available while it works.
It's a task, not a role. You'd write it
on a sticky note, right? Because what
happens with sticky notes? They get
thrown in the trash. Now, sideby-side
comparison here. The life cycle, right?
Persistent. Agents are persistent. They
live forever. Sub agents are temporary.
They autoarchive after each session. For
the workspace, agents have their own
isolated folder. Whereas sub agents, it
uses the parents workspace. Memory
files, right? Agents have their own set
of memory files. whereas sub agents
don't. There's no persistent. It's
reliant on that parent agent. Now, for
session store, right, agents have their
own full history, whereas sub agents do
not. They get thrown away. Now, agents
that are responsible for those
underlying sessions do, however, store
those in the parent workspace. O
profiles, as we mentioned above, right?
It's per agent O. And for the sub agent,
it inherits the parent workspaces. O for
agents, can they spawn others? Well, of
course they have the full session tools
available to them. For sub agents, no
session tools are disabled, right? Where
are they configured? The agent is
configured in openclaw.json, whereas the
sub aent is configured as a sessions
spawn with all the details here. Session
key. If this were to be an example for
Gary on Gary, right, it's like Gary
would be here and then there'd be a sub
agent and then the ID associated with
that session. Here's the workflow.
Common workflow of how things operate
for clear mud is I send in a task,
right? Dependent on the task. In this
example, it's a CSS bug on the
dashboard. Well, Muddy detects that this
is front-end work. Elon handles
engineering. I'll delegate. Elon then
reads from its own workspace, identifies
the front-end task. It has its own
workspace, right? It knows that it has
its own team of sub aents that are
predefined depending on the task. And
then it spins up Pixel, which is one of
our sub aents, which the session is
temporary. But we do predefine what
Pixel's responsibilities are at the
start of each prompt. And Pixel also has
his own skill tied to him that lives in
Elon's workspace so that it never fails
dependent on the task. Then we get the
result delivered once pixels complete.
Sub agent session gets archived, Elon's
memory updated, and Muddy closes the
loop. Now, what happens when it's just a
sub agent, right? Sometimes I send a
message to Muddy and Muddy handles it
inline, especially if it's research.
Well, Muddy determines I send a message
via Telegram or whatever my main session
chat is attached to. And Muddy
determines it's a quick task, no
department routing needed, spawns
directly. He then spawns a sub agent to
browse competitor channels, compiles
reports, returns findings in this
particular example, right? research what
competitors posted this week and then
done. Muddy stays available the entire
time. This is how I personally have my
system configured because I love when I
have a thought and Muddy's chat when my
main agent's chat is cued. I really
really dislike this. So I I configured
things in a way to operate this way. But
I wanted to use this as a sub agent
example because it's a perfect example
for that. Now moving along, right,
agents plus skills. This is where the
real power lives. And honestly, not
enough people are talking about this.
You know, skills on agents, they live in
the agents workspace skills directory.
They're loaded on every session and
available to the agent in any sub agent
it spawns. Right? As you can see here,
this is just an example of Elon's CTO
skills. We have a deploy checklist. We
have a security audit. We have a nightly
build which is a self-improvement that
gets triggered by a cron which we now
have you know the methodology
line by line in the skill so that it it
gives me a better output than it ever
did set as a Quran. It's really amazing.
It has persistent context. The agent
reads the skill every session. It
becomes part of how the agent thinks and
operates. It's inherited by sub agents.
When Elon spawns Pixel, Pixel can read
from skills in Elon's workspace. in your
main OpenClaw directory/skills.
They're actually available to all agents
on the server. Skills for sub agents,
they don't have their own skills folder,
but you can create skills that are
designed for a specific task, and the
sub agent can use and reference them in
the spawn prompt. Now, this gets
predefined. This requires a bit of
fine-tuning and understanding how this
works. You just communicate with your
primary OC agent to set this up. Now,
strategy, one skill per specialist. As
you can see here, we have front-end
patterns, backend patterns, and security
audit. Each sub aent reads this on
spawn. The prompt instructs the skill.
Read skill X, then do the task. The sub
agent follows the skill instructions for
that run. Consistent quality every
single time. Update once, all spawns
benefit. Change the skill file, and
every future sub aent spawn picks up the
update. Now, when to create a skill for
an agent versus a sub agent? Well, agent
level skill, the agent uses it across
many sessions. It defines how the agent
operates, morning briefs, executive
syncs, etc. It involves an ongoing
process, not a oneshot task. Multiple
sub aents might reference it, right? So,
executive briefing skill on muddy used
every morning by cron defines the entire
brief format, delivery channels, and QA
checks. For sub agent specialist skills,
it codifies how a specific type of task
should be done. It's referenced in the
session spawn prompt. Different sub
aents need different instructions. You
want repeatability without the overhead
of a full agent. Right? So, example, my
front-end patterns skill in Elon's
workspace. Pixel reads it on every
single spawn. It contains component
conventions, CSS rules, and testing
requirements. Right? And I wanted to
take the moment to show you where I
pulled all of this data from, including
my own system.
Everything you need to know is in the
OpenClaw docs, docs.openclaw.ai.
If you ever have a question, if you ever
hit a roadblock with your OpenClaw
agent, just ask for alternatives and
also reference this docs.openclaw.ai
AI and say, "I want you to be methodical
and dig through the documentation
because I guarantee you there's a
solution for what I want you to do that
you have told me otherwise." Right? Um
everything you want to set up is in the
docs, but you don't have to take the
time to read them. You can just feed the
docs with the required You can just feed
the docs with the feature you'd like to
build. Explain the feature you'd like to
build to your OC agent and then say
reference docs.openclaw.ai. AI. It is a
a hack that not not enough people are
talking about. You can literally create
anything you want to create this way. Uh
it just requires a little bit of
patience, a little bit of time, and I
guarantee you you'll find the solution
to all of your answers in the
docs.openclaw.ai
documentation on their website. So, I
wanted to keep today as short and brief
as possible. I just really wanted to
explain the key differences between an
agent versus a sub agent. Muddy has so
many skills attached to him. Now, he
doesn't call all these skills. He
doesn't use all these skills, but when
things get delegated, right, uh he
references these skills depending on
what it is. And some of these you'll
notice are actually built-in plugins for
OpenClaw itself. The same goes for Elon.
He has his own workspace. Gary Warren
then he has his own kind of parent
skills and then underlying right this is
where I visualize what skills go where.
Scout has his own set of skills
competitive battle card micros build
proposal generator. The same for Anvil,
right? He has a coding agent skill, a
convex pattern skill, a a GitHub issue
skill, a GitHub skill itself, right? We
have our security agent with a coding
agent skill, a security audit skill.
There are just I have countless skills
that I've slowly built out as I've built
out my organization. So, I hope at this
point in the video you have a clear
understanding versus what's an openclaw
agent and what's a sub agent, when to
use one versus the other, how they work,
how they communicate, and yeah, I hope
you found some value in today's video.
Now, I'm not an AI expert. I'm building
in public and sharing what actually
works. If you'd like to see me make a
particular video around a specific
topic, drop a comment below. Let me know
who you are, what you do, who your
target audience is, and what your
question is, and I will add a video to
my queue customtailored just for you.
Thank you so much for tuning in today's
video. My name is Marcelo. This is Clare
Mud, and clarity matters.
[music]